Kubernetes v1.34 Release Announcement Blog (#51877)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2025-08-27-Kubernetes-v1-34-Release/index.md

## Release theme and logo

\<TODO RELEASE THEME AND LOGO\>

## Spotlight on key updates

Kubernetes v1.34 is packed with new features and improvements. Here are a few select updates the Release Team would like to highlight!

### Stable: Automated cgroup driver detection

Historically, configuring the correct cgroup driver has been a pain point for users running Kubernetes clusters. This feature instructs the kubelet to ask the CRI implementation which cgroup driver to use. It was introduced in v1.28 and has graduated to stable in v1.34.  
The `kubelet` command line flag `--cgroup-driver` (and its alternative `cgroupDriver` in KubeletConfiguration) is marked as deprecated and in two releases or later it will be removed. This will make it impossible to use Kubernetes with the containerd 1.X versions. The timeline of this deprecation is aligned with containerd 1.7 EOL. This is an early warning that if you are using containerd 1.X, consider switching to 2.0+ soon.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#4033](https://kep.k8s.io/4033) led by SIG Node.

### Beta: Projected ServiceAccount tokens for `kubelet` image credential providers

> The `kubelet` credential providers, used for pulling private container images, traditionally relied on long-lived secrets stored on the node or in the cluster. This approach increased security risks and management overhead, as these credentials were not tied to the specific workload and did not rotate automatically.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `kubelet` credential providers, used for pulling private container images, traditionally relied on long-lived Secrets stored on the node or in the cluster. This approach increased security risks and management overhead, as these credentials were not tied to the specific workload and did not rotate automatically.  
```

---  
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes v1.34: RELEASE NAME'
date: 2025-08-27T10:30:00-08:00
draft: true
evergreen: true
slug: kubernetes-v1-34-release
author: >
  [Kubernetes v1.34 Release Team](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/releases/release-1.34/release-team.md)
---

**Editors:** Agustina Barbetta, Alejandro Josue Leon Bellido, Graziano Casto, Melony Qin, Dipesh Rawat

Similar to previous releases, the release of Kubernetes v1.34 introduces new stable, beta, and alpha features. The consistent delivery of high-quality releases underscores the strength of our development cycle and the vibrant support from our community.

This release consists of 58 enhancements. Of those enhancements, 23 have graduated to Stable, 22 are entering Beta, and 13 have graduated to Alpha.

> There are no deprecations or removals in this release.

Reviewer 2: +1, I think this is worth mentioning. Afaik, until v1.36, if `containerd` version is not `v2.x`, `cgroupDriver` from kubelet config will be used instead.   

But if we're talking about deprecations like this, then there is also: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-network/3015-prefer-same-node#summary

> Thus, this KEP deprecates PreferClose and replaces it with PreferSameZone as a new name for the old behavior.

> There are no deprecations or removals in this release.

Author: ```suggestion
There are also some [deprecations and removals](#deprecations-and-removals) in this release; make sure to read about those.
```

To solve this, the `kubelet` can now request short-lived, audience-bound ServiceAccount tokens for authenticating to container registries. This allows image pulls to be authorized based on the Pod's own identity rather than a node-level credential.  
The primary benefit is a significant security improvement. It eliminates the need for long-lived secrets for image pulls, reducing the attack surface and simplifying credential management for both administrators and developers

This work was done as part of [KEP \#4412](https://kep.k8s.io/4412) led by SIG Auth.

### \<Stable/Beta/Alpha\>: \<THEME 3\>

\<Pick a highlight from below and promote to spotlight?\>

### \<Stable/Beta/Alpha\>: \<THEME 4\>

\<Pick a highlight from below and promote to spotlight?\>

### \<Stable/Beta/Alpha\>: \<THEME 5\>

\<Pick a highlight from below and promote to spotlight?\>

## Features graduating to Stable

*This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now stable following the v1.34 release.*

### Delayed creation of Job’s replacement pods 

> By default, when a Pod enters a terminating state, the Job controller immediately creates a replacement Pod. Therefore, both Pods are running at the same time. This scenario is problematic for popular machine learning frameworks, such as TensorFlow and [JAX](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), which require at most one Pod running at the same time, for a given index.  

Author: ```suggestion
By default, Job controllers create replacement Pods immediately when a Pod starts terminating, causing both Pods to run simultaneously. This can cause resource contention in constrained clusters, where the replacement Pod may struggle to find available nodes until the original Pod fully terminates. The situation can also trigger unwanted cluster autoscaler scale-ups.
Additionally, some machine learning frameworks like TensorFlow and [JAX](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) require only one Pod per index to run at a time, making simultaneous Pod execution problematic. 
```

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5080](https://kep.k8s.io/5080) led by SIG API Machinery.

### Streaming `LIST` responses

Handling large `LIST` responses in Kubernetes previously posed a significant scalability challenge. When clients requested extensive resource lists, such as thousands of Pods or Custom Resources, the API server was required to serialize the entire collection of objects into a single, large memory buffer before sending it. This process created substantial memory pressure and could lead to performance degradation, impacting the overall stability of the cluster.  
To address this limitation, a streaming encoding mechanism for `LIST` responses has been introduced and is now a stable feature. The primary benefit of this approach is the avoidance of large memory allocations on the API server, resulting in a much smaller and more predictable memory footprint. Consequently, the cluster becomes more resilient and performant, especially in large-scale environments where frequent requests for extensive resource lists are common.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5116](https://kep.k8s.io/5116) led by SIG API Machinery.

> ### Consistent reads from cache

Reviewer 3: This isn't especially exciting to end users. AIUI ZThe TL;DR is that you now can't opt out of a mechanism where the API server uses the cache more effectively when responding to **list** requests.
It's been on by default since v1.31 and the graduation, whilst handy, doesn't seem notable to me.

Author: @Vyom-Yadav are we ok dropping this highlight?

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5100](https://kep.k8s.io/5100) led by SIG Windows.

### Sleep action for Container lifecycle hooks

A Sleep action for containers’ PreStop and PostStart lifecycle hooks was introduced to provide a straightforward way to manage graceful shutdowns and improve overall container lifecycle management.  
The Sleep action allows containers to pause for a specified duration after starting or before termination. Using a negative or zero sleep duration returns immediately, resulting in a no-op.  
The Sleep action was introduced in Kubernetes v1.29, with zero value support added in v1.32. Both features graduated to stable in v1.34.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#3960](https://kep.k8s.io/3960) and [KEP \#4818](https://kep.k8s.io/4818) led by SIG Node.

### Node swap support

Historically, the lack of swap support in Kubernetes could lead to workload instability, as nodes under memory pressure often had to terminate processes abruptly. This particularly affected applications with large but infrequently accessed memory footprints and prevented more graceful resource management.

> To address this, configurable per-node swap support was introduced in v1.22. It has progressed through alpha and beta stages and has graduated to stable in v1.34. The primary mode, `LimitedSwap`, allows Pods to use swap within their existing memory limits, providing a direct solution to the problem.

Author: ```suggestion
To address this, configurable per-node swap support was introduced in v1.22. It has progressed through alpha and beta stages and has graduated to stable in v1.34. The primary mode, `LimitedSwap`, allows Pods to use swap within their existing memory limits, providing a direct solution to the problem. By default, the `kubelet` is configured with `NoSwap` mode, which means Kubernetes workloads cannot use swap.
```

This work was done as part of [KEP \#2400](https://kep.k8s.io/2400) led by SIG Node.

### `kubelet` distributed tracing

The internal operations of the `kubelet` have been historically difficult to observe, making it challenging for administrators to debug issues occurring at the node level. This lack of deep visibility complicated the process of diagnosing performance bottlenecks, understanding Pod startup latency, and analyzing failures within the node agent.

To address this visibility gap, distributed tracing capabilities are introduced directly into the `kubelet` using the OpenTelemetry standard. By enabling this feature, operators can export detailed trace data to their observability backends. This provides an unprecedented level of insight, allowing for the precise tracing of requests related to the Pod lifecycle, volume management, and other critical functions, which is essential for effective debugging and performance analysis.

> This work was done as part of [KEP \#2831](https://kep.k8s.io/2831) led by SIG Node.

Author: SIG Instrumentation [didn't post in the highlights discussion](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C20HH14P7/p1753712307732619?thread_ts=1751402660.457859&cid=C20HH14P7), Kubelet OpenTelemetry tracing [was brought up by SIG Node](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/2806#discussioncomment-13939642).

I don't have a strong opinion, we could even drop this considering it was covered in the sneak peek already

> This work was done as part of [KEP \#2831](https://kep.k8s.io/2831) led by SIG Node.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, we can drop this given the fact we covered this in sneak peek.

### Allow special characters in environment variables

The environment variable validation rules in Kubernetes have been relaxed to allow nearly all printable ASCII characters, excluding \=. This change supports scenarios where workloads require nonstandard characters in variable names \- for example, frameworks like .NET Core that use :  to represent nested config paths.

The relaxed validation applies to environment variables defined directly in Pod spec, as well as those injected using envFrom references to ConfigMaps and Secrets.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#4369](https://kep.k8s.io/4369) led by SIG Node.

### Taint management is separated from Node lifecycle

> Historically, the `TaintManager`'s logic for applying NoSchedule and NoExecute taints to nodes based on their condition (e.g., NotReady, Unreachable) was tightly coupled with the `NodeLifecycleController`. This tight coupling made the code harder to maintain and test, and it also limited the flexibility of the taint-based eviction mechanism.  

Author: ```suggestion
Historically, the `TaintManager`'s logic for applying NoSchedule and NoExecute taints to nodes based on their condition (NotReady, Unreachable, etc.) was tightly coupled with the node lifecycle controller. This tight coupling made the code harder to maintain and test, and it also limited the flexibility of the taint-based eviction mechanism.
```

This enhancement graduated to beta in v1.33 and continues as beta in v1.34, it brings CEL-based validation rules to native Kubernetes types. It allows for more granular and declarative validation to be defined directly in the type definitions, improving API consistency and developer experience.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5073](https://kep.k8s.io/5073) led by SIG API Machinery.

### Streaming Informers for `LIST` Requests

The streaming informers feature, which has been in beta since v1.32, gains further beta refinements in v1.34. This capability allows `LIST` requests to return data as a continuous stream of objects from the API server’s watch cache, rather than assembling paged results directly from etcd. By reusing the same mechanics used for `WATCH` operations, the API server can serve large datasets while keeping memory usage steady and avoiding allocation spikes that can affect stability.

> In this release, the `WatchList` feature gate is now enabled by default for the `kube-apiserver`, and `WatchListClient` is enabled by default for `kube-controller-manager`. These changes strengthen integration with informer workflows, reduce memory pressure during large list operations, and improve reliability under sustained load, making `LIST` streaming more predictable and efficient.

Author: ```suggestion
In this release, the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-controller-manager` both take advantage of the new `WatchList` mechanism by default. For the `kube-apiserver`, this means list requests are streamed more efficiently, while the `kube-controller-manager` benefits from a more memory-efficient and predictable way to work with informers. Together, these improvements reduce memory pressure during large list operations, and improve reliability under sustained load, making list streaming more predictable and efficient.
```

### Pod-level resource requests and limits

Defining resource needs for Pods with multiple containers has been challenging, as requests and limits could only be set on a per-container basis. This forced developers to either over-provision resources for each container or meticulously divide the total desired resources, making configuration complex and often leading to inefficient resource allocation.  
To simplify this, the ability to specify resource requests and limits at the Pod level was introduced. This allows developers to define an overall resource budget for a Pod, which is then shared among its constituent containers. This feature was introduced as alpha in v1.32 and has graduated to beta in v1.34.  
The primary benefit is a more intuitive and straightforward way to manage resources for multi-container Pods. It ensures that the total resources used by all containers do not exceed the Pod's defined limits, leading to better resource planning, more accurate scheduling, and more efficient utilization of cluster resources.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#2837](https://kep.k8s.io/2837) led by SIG Autoscaling.

> ### Graceful node shutdown for Windows nodes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Graceful node shutdown handling for Windows nodes
```
?

The `kubelet` on Windows nodes can now detect system shutdown events and begin graceful termination of running pods. This mirrors existing behavior on Linux and helps ensure workloads exit cleanly during planned shutdowns or restarts.   
When the system begins shutting down, the `kubelet` reacts by using standard termination logic. It respects the configured lifecycle hooks and grace periods, giving pods time to stop before the node powers off. The feature relies on Windows pre-shutdown notifications to coordinate this process. This enhancement improves workload reliability during maintenance, restarts, or system updates. It is now in beta and enabled by default.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#4802](https://kep.k8s.io/4802) led by SIG Windows.

> ### In-Place Update of Pod Resources

Reviewer 3: nit: should be sentence case

Author: ```suggestion
### In-place update of Pod resources
```

> \<TODO 1-2 PARAGRAPH DESCRIPTION OF CHANGE\>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Currently, changing resource allocation requires the Pod to be recreated since the PodSpec's Container Resources is immutable. While many stateless workloads are designed to withstand such a disruption, some are more sensitive, especially when using low number of Pod replicas. In addition, for stateful or batch workloads, Pod restart is a serious disruption, resulting in lower availability or higher cost of running. 

So, allowing Resources to be changed without recreating the Pod or restarting the Containers addresses this issue directly.
This feature graduated to beta and was enabled by default in v1.33, in v1.34 it stays beta, but this proposal aims at allowing Pod resource requests & limits to be updated in-place, without a need to restart the Pod or its Containers. It aims to improve the Container Runtime Interface (CRI) APIs for managing a Container's CPU and memory resource configurations on the runtime. It seeks to extend `UpdateContainerResources` CRI API such that it works for Windows, and other future runtimes besides Linux. It also seeks to extend **`ContainerStatus`** CRI API to allow Kubelet to discover the current resources configured on a Container.

```

Reviewer 3: @cloudmelon by "currently" do you mean "Now that v1.34 has been released"?
People will read this on release day…

Author: This KEP got a lengthy section in the previous announcement, I'd suggest to keep it brief and stick to the [information provided in the highlights discussion](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/2806#discussioncomment-13939642)

```suggestion
Graduated to beta and enabled by default in v1.33, in-place Pod resizing receives additional improvements in v1.34. These improvements include support for decreasing memory usage, and integration with Pod-level resources.

This feature remains in beta in v1.34. For detailed usage instructions and examples, refer to the documentation: [Resize CPU and Memory Resources assigned to Containers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/resize-container-resources/).
```

This work was done as part of [KEP \#1287](https://kep.k8s.io/1287) led by SIG Node.

## New features in Alpha

*This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now alpha following the v1.34 release.*

### Support for KYAML: a Kubernetes dialect of YAML

KYAML aims to be a safer and less ambiguous YAML subset, and was designed specifically for Kubernetes. Whatever version of Kubernetes you use, you'll be able to use KYAML for writing manifests and/or Helm charts.   
KYAML addresses specific challenges with both YAML and JSON. YAML's significant whitespace requires careful attention to indentation and nesting, while its optional string-quoting can lead to unexpected type coercion (for example: ["The Norway Bug"](https://hitchdev.com/strictyaml/why/implicit-typing-removed/)). Meanwhile, JSON lacks comment support and has strict requirements for trailing commas and quoted keys.   

> You can write KYAML and pass it as an input to any version of `kubectl`, because all KYAML files are also valid as YAML. With `kubectl` v1.34, we expect you'll also be able to request KYAML output (as in `kubectl get -o kyaml …`). If you prefer, you can still request the output in JSON or YAML format.

Reviewer 3: This needs a rewrite; we no longer "expect".

The primary benefit is a significant security improvement. It eliminates the need for long-lived secrets for image pulls, reducing the attack surface and simplifying credential management for both administrators and developers

This work was done as part of [KEP \#4412](https://kep.k8s.io/4412) led by SIG Auth.

### Alpha: Support for KYAML, a Kubernetes dialect of YAML

KYAML aims to be a safer and less ambiguous YAML subset, and was designed specifically for Kubernetes. Whatever version of Kubernetes you use, starting from Kubernetes v1.34 you are able to use KYAML for writing manifests and/or Helm charts.
   
KYAML addresses specific challenges with both YAML and JSON. YAML's significant whitespace requires careful attention to indentation and nesting, while its optional string-quoting can lead to unexpected type coercion (for example: ["The Norway Bug"](https://hitchdev.com/strictyaml/why/implicit-typing-removed/)). Meanwhile, JSON lacks comment support and has strict requirements for trailing commas and quoted keys. 
  

> You can write KYAML and pass it as an input to any version of `kubectl`, because all KYAML files are also valid as YAML. With `kubectl` v1.34, you are also able to request KYAML output (as in `kubectl get -o kyaml …`). If you prefer, you can still request the output in JSON or YAML format.

Author: ```suggestion
You can write KYAML and pass it as an input to any version of `kubectl`, because all KYAML files are also valid as YAML. With `kubectl` v1.34, you are also able to [request KYAML output](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/#syntax-1) (as in kubectl get -o kyaml …) when the feature is enabled. If you prefer, you can still request the output in JSON or YAML format.
```

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5073](https://kep.k8s.io/5073) led by SIG API Machinery.

### Streaming Informers for **list** Requests

The streaming informers feature, which has been in beta since v1.32, gains further beta refinements in v1.34. This capability allows **list** requests to return data as a continuous stream of objects from the API server’s watch cache, rather than assembling paged results directly from etcd. By reusing the same mechanics used for **watch** operations, the API server can serve large datasets while keeping memory usage steady and avoiding allocation spikes that can affect stability.

In this release, the `WatchList` feature gate is now enabled by default for the `kube-apiserver`, and `WatchListClient` is enabled by default for `kube-controller-manager`. These changes strengthen integration with informer workflows, reduce memory pressure during large list operations, and improve reliability under sustained load, making `LIST` streaming more predictable and efficient.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#3157](https://kep.k8s.io/3157) led by SIG API Machinery.

> ### Pod-level resource requests and limits

Author: moved

This work was done as part of [KEP \#2837](https://kep.k8s.io/2837) led by SIG Autoscaling.

### Graceful node shutdown handling for Windows nodes

The `kubelet` on Windows nodes can now detect system shutdown events and begin graceful termination of running Pods. This mirrors existing behavior on Linux and helps ensure workloads exit cleanly during planned shutdowns or restarts.   
When the system begins shutting down, the `kubelet` reacts by using standard termination logic. It respects the configured lifecycle hooks and grace periods, giving Pods time to stop before the node powers off. The feature relies on Windows pre-shutdown notifications to coordinate this process. This enhancement improves workload reliability during maintenance, restarts, or system updates. It is now in beta and enabled by default.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#4802](https://kep.k8s.io/4802) led by SIG Windows.

### In-place Pod resize improvements

Graduated to beta and enabled by default in v1.33, in-place Pod resizing receives further improvements in v1.34. These include support for decreasing memory usage and integration with Pod-level resources.

> This feature remains in beta in v1.34. For detailed usage instructions and examples, refer to the documentation: [Resize CPU and Memory Resources assigned to Containers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/resize-container-resources/).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This feature remains in beta in v1.34. For detailed usage instructions and examples, refer to the documentation: [Resize CPU and Memory Resources assigned to Containers](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/resize-container-resources/).
```

This work was done as part of [KEP \#1287](https://kep.k8s.io/1287) led by SIG Node and SIG Autoscaling.

## New features in Alpha

*This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now alpha following the v1.34 release.*

### Pod certificates for mTLS authentication

Authenticating workloads within a cluster, especially for communication with the API server, has primarily relied on ServiceAccount tokens. While effective, these tokens aren't always ideal for establishing a strong, verifiable identity for mutual TLS (mTLS) and can present challenges when integrating with external systems that expect certificate-based authentication.  

> A built-in mechanism for Pods to obtain X.509 certificates was introduced in v1.34. The `kubelet` can now request and manage certificates for Pods, which can then be used to authenticate to the Kubernetes API server and other services using mTLS.  

Reviewer 5: **Note:** Link will resolve once v1.34 docs are published. Refer [vNext docs preview (here) ](https://kubernetes-io-vnext-staging.netlify.app/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/certificate-signing-requests/#pod-certificate-requests)for now to validate the link.

```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.34 introduces a built-in mechanism for Pods to obtain X.509 certificates via [PodCertificateRequests](/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/certificate-signing-requests/#pod-certificate-requests). The kubelet can request and manage certificates for Pods, which can then be used to authenticate to the Kubernetes API server and other services using mTLS.
```

The primary benefit is a more robust and flexible identity mechanism for Pods. It provides a native way to implement strong mTLS authentication without relying solely on bearer tokens, aligning Kubernetes with standard security practices and simplifying integrations with certificate-aware observability and security tooling.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#4317](https://kep.k8s.io/4317) led by SIG Auth.

### PodSecurityAdmission to control `host` in probes and lifecycle handlers

The `host` field within probes and lifecycle handlers allows users to specify an entity other than the `podIP` for the `kubelet` to probe. However, this opens it up for security attacks since the `host` field can be set to any value in the system, including security sensitive external hosts or localhost on the node.   

> This improvement introduces a Pod Security Admission policy to prevent SSRF attacks by warning or blocking users when `host` field is used.

Author: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.34, Pods only meet the 
[Restricted](/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/#restricted)
Pod security standard if they either leave the `host` field unset, or if they don't even use this
kind of probe.
You can use _Pod security admission_, or a third party solution, to enforce that Pods meet this standard. Because these are security controls, check
the documentation to understand the limitations and behavior of the enforcement mechanism you choose.
```

#### Extended resource mapping

Extended resource mapping provides a simpler alternative to DRA's expressive and flexible approach by offering a straightforward way to describe resource capacity and consumption. This feature enables cluster administrators to advertise DRA-managed resources as *extended resources*, allowing application developers and operators to continue using the familiar container’s `.spec.resources` syntax to consume them.  
This enables existing workloads to adopt DRA without modifications, simplifying the transition to DRA for both application developers and cluster administrators.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5004](https://kep.k8s.io/5004) led by WG Device Management.

#### DRA Consumable Capacity

Kubernetes v1.33 added support for resource drivers to advertise slices of a device that are available, rather than exposing the entire device as an all-or-nothing resource. However, this approach couldn't handle scenarios where device drivers manage fine-grained, dynamic portions of a device resource based on user demand, or share those resources independently of ResourceClaims, which are restricted by their spec and namespace.  

> Introduced as alpha in v1.34, the `DRAConsumableCapacity` feature gate allows resource drivers to share the same device, or even a slice of a device, across multiple ResourceClaims or across multiple DeviceRequests. The feature also extends the scheduler to support allocating portions of device resources as defined in the `capacity` field.  

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
Enabling the `DRAConsumableCapacity` feature gate
(introduced as alpha in v1.34)
allows resource drivers to share the same device, or even a slice of a device, across multiple ResourceClaims or across multiple DeviceRequests.
The feature also extends the scheduler to support allocating portions of device resources,
as defined in the `capacity` field.
```

This work was done as part of [KEP \#2837](https://kep.k8s.io/2837) led by SIG Autoscaling.

### Graceful node shutdown for Windows nodes

The `kubelet` on Windows nodes can now detect system shutdown events and begin graceful termination of running pods. This mirrors existing behavior on Linux and helps ensure workloads exit cleanly during planned shutdowns or restarts.   
When the system begins shutting down, the `kubelet` reacts by using standard termination logic. It respects the configured lifecycle hooks and grace periods, giving pods time to stop before the node powers off. The feature relies on Windows pre-shutdown notifications to coordinate this process. This enhancement improves workload reliability during maintenance, restarts, or system updates. It is now in beta and enabled by default.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#4802](https://kep.k8s.io/4802) led by SIG Windows.

### In-place update of Pod resources

\<TODO 1-2 PARAGRAPH DESCRIPTION OF CHANGE\>

> This work was done as part of [KEP \#1287](https://kep.k8s.io/1287) led by SIG Node.

Author: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP \#1287](https://kep.k8s.io/1287) led by SIG Node and SIG Autoscaling.

The primary benefit of this approach is the avoidance of large memory allocations on the API server, resulting in a much smaller and more predictable memory footprint.
Consequently, the cluster becomes more resilient and performant, especially in large-scale environments where frequent requests for extensive resource lists are common.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5116](https://kep.k8s.io/5116) led by SIG API Machinery.

### Consistent reads from cache

Kubernetes guarantees that **get** and **list** requests are _consistent reads_, provided that the
`resourceVersion` query parameter is not provided.
In earlier versions of Kubernetes, the API server ensured consistent reads by fetching data
directly from
etcd using a quorum read. But often the watch cache contains sufficiently up-to-date data to serve the read request, and could serve it far more efficiently.  
Kubernetes v1.34 uses an optimized mechanism that
provides the same guarantee, but allows the API server to rely on cache more often.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#2340](https://kep.k8s.io/2340) led by SIG API Machinery.

### Resilient watch cache initialization

\<TODO 1-2 PARAGRAPH DESCRIPTION OF CHANGE\>

> This work was done as part of [KEP \#4568](https://kep.k8s.io/4568) led by SIG API Machinery.

Author: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP \#4568](https://kep.k8s.io/4568) led by SIG API Machinery and SIG Scalability.
```

This KEP refactors the `TaintManager` into its own separate controller within the Kubernetes controller manager. It is an internal architectural improvement designed to increase code modularity and maintainability. This change allows the logic for taint-based evictions to be tested and evolved independently, but it has no direct user-facing impact on how taints are used.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#3902](https://kep.k8s.io/3902) led by SIG Node.

## New features in Beta

*This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now beta following the v1.34 release.*

### `.kuberc` file for `kubectl` user preferences

A `.kuberc` configuration file allows you to define preferences for `kubectl`, such as default options and command aliases. Unlike the kubeconfig file, the `.kuberc` configuration file does not contain cluster details, usernames or passwords.  
This feature was introduced as alpha in v1.33, gated behind the environment variable `KUBECTL_KUBERC`. It has graduated to beta in v1.34 and is enabled by default.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#3104](https://kep.k8s.io/3104) led by SIG CLI.

### External ServiceAccount token signing

> \<TODO 1-2 PARAGRAPH DESCRIPTION OF CHANGE\>

Author: ```suggestion
Traditionally, Kubernetes manages ServiceAccount tokens using static signing keys that are loaded from disk at `kube-apiserver` startup. This feature introduces an `ExternalJWTSigner` gRPC service for out-of-process signing, enabling Kubernetes distributions to integrate with external key management solutions (for example, HSMs, cloud KMSes) for ServiceAccount token signing instead of static disk-based keys.

Introduced as alpha in v1.32, this external JWT signing capability advances to beta and is enabled by default in v1.34.
```

This work was done as part of [KEP \#4412](https://kep.k8s.io/4412) led by SIG Auth.

### Alpha: Support for KYAML, a Kubernetes dialect of YAML

KYAML aims to be a safer and less ambiguous YAML subset, and was designed specifically for Kubernetes. Whatever version of Kubernetes you use, starting from Kubernetes v1.34 you are able to use KYAML for writing manifests and/or Helm charts.
   
KYAML addresses specific challenges with both YAML and JSON. YAML's significant whitespace requires careful attention to indentation and nesting, while its optional string-quoting can lead to unexpected type coercion (for example: ["The Norway Bug"](https://hitchdev.com/strictyaml/why/implicit-typing-removed/)). Meanwhile, JSON lacks comment support and has strict requirements for trailing commas and quoted keys. 
  
You can write KYAML and pass it as an input to any version of `kubectl`, because all KYAML files are also valid as YAML. With `kubectl` v1.34, you are also able to request KYAML output (as in `kubectl get -o kyaml …`). If you prefer, you can still request the output in JSON or YAML format.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5295](https://kep.k8s.io/5295) led by SIG CLI.

> ### \<Stable/Beta/Alpha\>: \<THEME 4\>

Reviewer 6: one thing in 1.34 that may be breaking customer is the static pod are not allowed to have API objects: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/131837

This is a change of behavior that may require to change static pod definition and deserves to be highlighted.

cc: @BenTheElder

Author: I'm not sure we have a place for changes like this in the Release Announcement 🤔 I would make sure this is covered properly in the release notes.

This feature was introduced as alpha in v1.33, gated behind the environment variable `KUBECTL_KUBERC`. It has graduated to beta in v1.34 and is enabled by default.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#3104](https://kep.k8s.io/3104) led by SIG CLI.

### External ServiceAccount token signing

Traditionally, Kubernetes manages ServiceAccount tokens using static signing keys that are loaded from disk at `kube-apiserver` startup. This feature introduces an `ExternalJWTSigner` gRPC service for out-of-process signing, enabling Kubernetes distributions to integrate with external key management solutions (for example, HSMs, cloud KMSes) for ServiceAccount token signing instead of static disk-based keys.

Introduced as alpha in v1.32, this external JWT signing capability advances to beta and is enabled by default in v1.34.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#740](https://kep.k8s.io/740) led by SIG Auth.

### DRA features in beta

#### Admin access for secure resource monitoring

> DRA supports controlled administrative access through the `adminAccess` field in ResourceClaims or ResourceClaimTemplates, allowing cluster operators to access devices already in use by others for monitoring or diagnostics. This privileged mode is restricted to users authorized to create such objects in namespaces labeled with resource.k8s.io/admin-access: "true", ensuring regular workloads remain unaffected. This feature graduated to beta in v1.34, providing secure introspection capabilities while maintaining isolation through namespace-based authorization checks.

Author: ```suggestion
DRA supports controlled administrative access via the `adminAccess` field in ResourceClaims or ResourceClaimTemplates, allowing cluster operators to access devices already in use by others for monitoring or diagnostics. This privileged mode is limited to users authorized to create such objects in namespaces labeled `resource.k8s.io/admin-access: "true"`, ensuring regular workloads remain unaffected. Graduating to beta in v1.34, this feature provides secure introspection capabilities while preserving workload isolation through namespace-based authorization checks.
```

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5007](https://kep.k8s.io/5007) led by WG Device Management.

### Container restart rules

Currently, all containers within a Pod will follow the same `.spec.restartPolicy` when exited or crashed. However, Pods that run multiple containers might have different restart requirements for each container. For example, for init containers used to perform initialization, you may not want to retry initialization if they fail. Similarly, in ML research environments with long-running training workloads, containers that fail with retriable exit codes should restart quickly in place, rather than triggering Pod recreation and losing progress.  
Kubernetes v1.34 introduces the `ContainerRestartRules` feature gate. When enabled, a `restartPolicy` can be specified for each container within a Pod. A `restartPolicyRules` list can also be defined to override `restartPolicy` based on the last exit code. This provides the fine-grained control needed to handle complex scenarios and better utilization of compute resources. 

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5307](https://kep.k8s.io/5307) led by SIG Node.

> 

Reviewer 6: Let's also mention this KEP: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3721

It allows to configure dynamic environment variables for the Pod. Among others, it enables things like this: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/130435#issuecomment-3184604112

Author: Was this KEP mentioned in the Release Highlights discussion? If not, can you provide a paragraph or two describing the enhancement that we can incorporate into the announcement?

Reviewer 6: cc @HirazawaUi

```suggestion

### Environment variables from a file

Application developers was asking for a long time for more flexibility when declaring the environment variables. Before this version, environment variables were always declared on API server side - via static values, configmaps, or secrets. Now, environment variables can be declared at runtime. One container - typically Init container - will declare the variable and store it in a file. And another container will be started with the environment variable declared in this file. The same was possible before by "wrapping" the target container's entry point. Now, no container modification is needed to implement a flexible in-Pod container orchestration. One of the use cases driven this is AI/ML training workloads where each Pod of a training Job needs to be initialized with the runtime-defined values.

This work was done as part of [KEP \#5307](https://kep.k8s.io/3721) led by SIG Node.
```

Author: added

* [Kubelet OpenTelemetry Tracing](https://kep.k8s.io/2831)
* [Kubernetes VolumeAttributesClass ModifyVolume](https://kep.k8s.io/3751)
* [Node memory swap support](https://kep.k8s.io/2400)
* [Only allow anonymous auth for configured endpoints](https://kep.k8s.io/4633)
* [Ordered namespace deletion](https://kep.k8s.io/5080)
* [Per-plugin callback functions for accurate requeueing in kube-scheduler](https://kep.k8s.io/4247)
* [Relaxed DNS search string validation](https://kep.k8s.io/4427)
* [Resilient Watchcache Initialization](https://kep.k8s.io/4568)
* [Streaming Encoding for LIST Responses](https://kep.k8s.io/5116)
* [Structured Authentication Config](https://kep.k8s.io/3331)
* [Support for Direct Service Return (DSR) and overlay networking in Windows kube-proxy](https://kep.k8s.io/5100)
* [Support recovery from volume expansion failure](https://kep.k8s.io/1790)

### Deprecations and removals

As Kubernetes develops and matures, features may be deprecated, removed, or replaced with better ones for the project's overall health. However, **Kubernetes v1.34 does not include any removal or deprecation.**

## Release notes

> Check out the full details of the Kubernetes v1.34 release in our [release notes](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.34.md).

Author: Reach out to Release Docs at #release-docs

* [Node memory swap support](https://kep.k8s.io/2400)
* [Only allow anonymous auth for configured endpoints](https://kep.k8s.io/4633)
* [Ordered namespace deletion](https://kep.k8s.io/5080)
* [Per-plugin callback functions for accurate requeueing in kube-scheduler](https://kep.k8s.io/4247)
* [Relaxed DNS search string validation](https://kep.k8s.io/4427)
* [Resilient Watchcache Initialization](https://kep.k8s.io/4568)
* [Streaming Encoding for LIST Responses](https://kep.k8s.io/5116)
* [Structured Authentication Config](https://kep.k8s.io/3331)
* [Support for Direct Service Return (DSR) and overlay networking in Windows kube-proxy](https://kep.k8s.io/5100)
* [Support recovery from volume expansion failure](https://kep.k8s.io/1790)

### Deprecations and removals

As Kubernetes develops and matures, features may be deprecated, removed, or replaced with better
ones to improve the project's overall health. See the Kubernetes
[deprecation and removal policy](/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/) for more details on
this process. Kubernetes v1.34 includes a couple of deprecations.

#### Automated cgroup driver detection

> Historically, configuring the correct cgroup driver has been a pain point for users running Kubernetes clusters. This feature instructs the `kubelet` to ask the CRI implementation which cgroup driver to use. It was introduced in v1.28 and has graduated to stable in v1.34.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Historically, configuring the correct cgroup driver has been a pain point for users running Kubernetes clusters.
Kubernetes v1.28 added a way for the kubelet
to query the CRI implementation and find which cgroup driver to use. That automated detection is now
**mandatory** and and has graduated to stable in v1.34.
If your CRI container runtime does not support the
ability to report the croup driver it needs, you
must upgrade or change your container runtime.
```

Reviewer 3: Does that sound right?

> The `kubelet` command line flag `--cgroup-driver` (and its alternative `cgroupDriver` in KubeletConfiguration) is marked as deprecated and in two releases or later it will be removed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `kubelet` configuration setting `cgroupDriver` (in the kubelet configuration file) is now deprecated. The command line option `--cgroup-driver` was already deprecated because Kubernetes
recommends using the configuration file instead.
Both will be removed; that removal will not happen before the v1.36 minor release.
```
?

Author: ```suggestion
The `cgroupDriver` configuration setting in the `kubelet` configuration file is now deprecated. 
The corresponding command-line option `--cgroup-driver` was previously deprecated, 
as Kubernetes recommends using the configuration file instead. 
Both the configuration setting and command-line option will be removed in a future release, 
that removal will not happen before the v1.36 minor release.
```
